---
layout: post
title: "Elon Musk Broke My Dissertation"
date: 2022-11-20 11:41:05 +0000
categories: dissertation
---

I'm an MSc student studying Computer Science with Big Data Analytics at a
British University. I was really excited for this month to begin, because I was
about to start working on my dissertation. I had an idea I loved, a really clear
idea of the theoretical underpinnings of the research I was going to do, a well
established methodology, and two weeks clear in my diary to focus exclusively on
completing the work.

Alas. Rich people fuck everything up.

My original dissertation proposal involved analysing tweets about trans people
and seeing a) how many of the accounts involved in that discourse are bots and
b) to what extent British newspaper coverage of trans people was a driver of
Twitter discourse. The proposal was beautiful. There were charts. Graphs. A very
throrough literature review with an excellently cited reference list in the IEEE
style. But in the week before I started, Elon Musk acquired Twitter, fired half
the staff, and then issued an ultimatum that (reportedly) has led to 75% of the
remaining staff also quitting. It seems unlikely that my application to use
Twitter's academic API is going to be approved. Who is left to approve it? And
whilst I could use some of the third party Twitter scraping tools available,
that would likely be dicey with my university's research ethics board. Even if I
got breaking the Twitter TOS past the ethics board, there's still every chance
that I'd spend the next two weeks developing my instruments, only to then find
that Twitter had stopped existing in the mean time.

I've got very little faith in billionaires in general, or in Elon Musk
specifically, and I'm not risking my chance at a distinction on the off chance
he can pull the service out of its death spiral. So, a quarter of the way
through my dissertation module, I'm having to start from scratch. Like every
other rat fleeing the ship, I wondered if Mastodon might work for my purposes. I
got myself [a profile](https://tech.lgbt/@Crybaby), made some toots, followed
some new cool nerdy people. But when I started to read about using Mastodon for
research, I came across a really broad range of posts from users adamantly
rejecting the use of standard Twitter research methodologies (scraping,
profiling, assumed consent) on Mastodon servers.

As Mastodon is likely to be a much bigger player in social media going forward,
and to start to receive the research attention previously pointed at Twitter,
investigation into user beliefs around research ethics seems timely. Theres just
enough academic literature about the service that I can pull together a
literature review around it. Plus, I can re-use some of the literature review
I've already written. So, for that mix of pragmatism and genuine curiosity, I'm
going to refocus my dissertation to explore how Mastodon users believe computer
science researchers should gather and use their data.

My posts for the next two weeks are going to be summaries of the existing
literature around social media research and consent, as well as descriptions of
the small amount of research that has been undertaken on Mastodon itself. I'm
also going to be looking at people's public responses to the idea of using
Mastodon in Big Data research.
